In this document, we look at some other products in the productivity app space and see how they compare to the app we want to make.

# Tick Tick
This app offers daily task and habit scheduling with a notification system. There is also a very convenient system in place which allows users to turn e-mails into tasks; each user is given a unique ticktick e-mail address which they can forward e-mails to that are then automatically turned into tasks. The app also takes care of times automatically, such as “tomorrow at 4pm”, and sets a reminder for you. The app also allows users to manually add tags to their tasks such as “urgent”, “delayed”, and one can filter tasks by these tags or by date. Users can share their tasks along with their notes, tables, lists, etc. with other users of the app.

When it comes to actually getting work done, the app lets you set Pomodoro timers or play white noise for you while you work. There is a selection of about 30+ sounds you can play.

Lastly, Tick Tick provides users a built-in statistics tracker to log productivity. Users can view their productivity within a given time period, where productivity is measured by how far ahead of schedule a task was completed. The assumption is that if a task is completed well ahead of schedule, more time must have been allocated to it because the user felt it was a larger task.

One interesting double-edged part of the app is that it allows users the ability to compare their productivity scores with other users, and gives them a ranking such as “you are more productive than 33% of users”. This could encourage users to treat the app as competitive instead of its true purpose, and maybe even start misusing the task system to this end.

This app has a very similar user base to our ideal one, people who want to plan tasks ahead of time, have some reward for completing them, be able to view their progress, and have the app create a comfortable environment for them to work in. However, the app focuses too much on the reward aspect and especially the competitive aspect, and we feel this takes away from its main purpose. We think this decision was made in order to keep users fixated on their performance relative to other users, but this makes the app too much like other social medias which are addictive in nature.

# Forest 
This app offers very little in the way of actual task planning or management. Users are allowed to set a timer for a task ahead of time. The app will visually begin to grow a tree while the user has the app open and is not on any social medias. The timer will then begin to gain time instead of decreasing. If the timer runs out, the tree will die. 

The app is also partnered with a tree-planting organization which plants a tree whenever a user finishes growing one in-game. 

With this and the visualization, the app offers users a very tangible measure of their progress and motivates them with the sense that their productivity is meaningful in a sense outside of their work. However, it is still lacking in structure and is only ever useful for when tasks are actually being completed, when more attention should be given to planning for them.

The user base for this app is people who have trouble staying focused on tasks, but not necessarily those who wish to have a well structured planner for them. The app could add features such as task planning and reminders for them, but this would take away user focus from the tree being grown while a task is complete. This app fails to account for the fact that procrastination is not always a result of lack of focus, it can also be the result of a lack of structure/planning.

# Emacs Org Mode

Org Mode is an extremely powerful tool for tracking to-do lists. Like Tick Tick, it lets users create lists for tasks or for note-taking. Emacs also offers the ability to dynamically change the sorting order of a list, or filter it, or apply some operation to each item (string) in the list, or change the list type from numbered to non-numbered. Tasks can also be scheduled and ticked completed. Macros can also be written in Emacs’s own language, Emacs Lisp, which allow users to assign certain text patterns to keybindings when note-taking. Files written in Emacs can also be exported using its built-in markup feature, which converts the text file into a nicely formatted pdf. 

While Emacs is a very powerful text-editing and navigation tool, it is lacking in task scheduling from some of the other apps we’ve discussed. In particular, it forces most things to be text-based, which is a downgrade from some of the more visual features of Tick Tick. It is also missing a reliable notification system which our app would provide. Emacs also has an extremely steep learning curve and requires users to know how to program in lisp in order to perform basic customization and configuration on the editor.

This app’s user base differs from ours quite a bit; in that it’s designed for use by programmers for programmers. As a result, it suffers in the way of accessibility and exposure; people don’t hear about emacs because they aren’t programmers or don’t know programmers who use it. Org mode is a special feature for seasoned users of the app who already know how to program, and in this sense it does serve its target user base well. To broaden the user base would take away some of the power of org mode, as it must abide by emacs keybindings and be programmable by lisp. Our app seeks to harness the things emacs does right, but avoid the steep learning curve and the need to be a programmer in order to be a user.

# Summary
A good productivity app should be easy to use, customizable, and have a visual indicator of progress on completing tasks. What an app can offer in the way of actually getting your work done is very limited, but Tick Tick does offer Pomodoro timers and white noises to help you work which are a bonus. Furthermore, all three apps offer quality of life features such as exporting to pdf, sharing tasks with other users, viewing lifetime productivity, and sorting tasks by urgency or by other filters. We should build on these principles of what makes a good productivity app, mostly in the way of Tick Tick, but taking the extra step of also being careful of how we use statistics to reward users for good productivity. We want a statistics tracker that minimizes the user’s ability to misuse the app to manipulate the reward system in their favour. We should also be careful of comparing a user’s stats to other users; the user should only feel in competition with themselves to be more productive.
